[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hi, James here
from "Food Matters,"
and welcome to this FM TV
special interview with none
other than David Avocado Wolfe.
He is an expert nutritionist.
He is a raw food
fanatic, I would
say, like really
inspiring people
to eat more raw foods
and super foods.
He's one of the founders of the
Fruit Tree Planting Foundation.
I love this.
They've planted tens of
thousands of edible fruit trees
around the world, a lot of
cacao, I'm pretty certain.
He is a featured expert in
"Food Matters" and "Hungry
for Change" and many other
great films on FM TV,
so make sure to check them out.
An absolute inspiration.
It's awesome chatting
with you today, David.
How are you?
>> Fantastic.
Best ever.
>> Cool.
So it's been, I think
we just figured out,
11 years since we
first got together
and we did the interview
for "Food Matters."
And just what a stellar
experience and life we've
had since that time.
So grateful to have had
that moment with you.
>> Thank you.
That's the film that
went all the way.
And what a great breakthrough.
>> Yeah, it was
really fun to do.
And I'm glad it's still
inspiring people to this day.
And you had such a great energy.
So just thank you again.
It was an amazing experience.
>> Thank you.
I still get people coming up
to me at airports and saying,
are you the guy from
that "Food Matters" film?
It comes up a lot.
>> Cool.
So what's happened in
that time in nutrition?
And so tell me the latest on
sort of like detox cleansing,
energy boosting, weight loss.
Any sort of breaking research
or superfoods or anything
that you're into right now
that can help people with that?
>> Well, one of the breakthrough
research projects was done
by a French researcher
named Fathi Moussa,
who was studying
toxicology in mice.
And he was using
a compound called
the C60 buckminsterfullerene
carbon molecule that
had been elucidated by Sir Harry
Kroto, who won the Nobel Prize
for his discoveries in 1996.
And the toxicology
study was on olive oil,
and then olive oil with the
buckminsterfullerenes in it,
and then a control group.
And I think there was five
overall different groups
in that study of mice.
And they were still
alive five years later.
Now mice only live
2 and 1/2 years.
It's the greatest breakthrough
in longevity research
ever in mice.
And it came through
a toxicology study.
They weren't trying to
break longevity records.
They were just checking
out, is this stuff toxic?
What's going to happen if
we give mice this stuff?
And it's a repeated discovery
that detoxification is
more important than nutrition.
Now that's a shocker.
That led me down a
rabbit hole of research
into charcoal in general,
because basically, the C60
molecule is a type of charcoal.
It's when lightning strikes
a tree and burns it,
that's what's left over.
And so I started digging
into activated charcoal
and its effect on longevity.
Now the crazy news
about that is it
has been known for decades,
if not a half century,
that activated charcoal is
the number one longevity
substance in mice, typically,
until the C60 came along.
We never heard about that.
That's important information.
Like, wait a second.
You're talking about
the activated charcoal
you find in a health
food store that they
use in emergency
rooms when somebody
comes in from a toxic overdose
of something can extend life.
And the answer is, you bet.
And it does so in a
way that's shocking.
It basically does so
because detoxification
is more important than
nutrition for longevity.
And ultimately, it indicates
that what's getting us
in the end is we intoxicate.
We just drown our own toxins.
And if we keep cleaning our
body, keep cleaning our body,
using the charcoal, using the
fasting, hot, cold therapy,
expansion, contraction,
making sure
that we don't do anything
that's toxic, right?
We go organic and get all
the chemicals and sprays
and all the household cleaning
products out of our house.
Then we can live longer,
and not only live longer
but live better.
Because who cares how
long we're going to live?
It's just, when we're 100, we
want to have all our faculties.
And this is part of that path.
So that's been the biggest
breakthrough for me recently.
>> Nice.
We want to have the
best day ever every day.
>> Absolutely.
>> Up until the last day.
And that's the only way.
And so that's why
I'm into prevention.
And one of the
things I'm doing now
is leading people down to
Mexico, Guadalajara, and Cancun
on stem cell events
and retreats.
And this is--
>> Yeah, I saw your
post on that recently.
>> Oh, it's prevention.
It's like, look, people are
like, why would you need that?
You're eating all natural foods.
It's because I
know what happens.
Even if you eat
all natural foods,
yeah, you could make it
to 80 or 85 or 88 or 90,
but that's not my goal.
My goal is to make it hundreds
of years, if it's possible.
And the only way
I'm going to get
there is if I have
to take action.
And I have to see what works.
Those treatments,
by the way, stem
cell treatments in the last
11 years saved my mom's life.
I brought my chemist down
there and saved his life.
Like, literally overnight, boom,
went from almost dead to back
to life, just like
that, overnight.
That's how powerful stem
cell treatments are.
We're not always having eaten
the best things in our life,
as we become conscious at some
certain point and go, oh, wait,
I've got to shift.
So all those mistakes
we've made before, it
may have damaged our system.
We may have lost some of our
jing and vital bone marrow life
force.
And the stem cell treatments can
rejuvenate that and bring that
back and possibly even build
something for the future.
That's what the animal
research indicates,
is that might get an extra
25% of life, which is good.
If you can live to be 100--
>> Staggering.
>> --125 is better.
>> Absolutely.
What are some signs and symptoms
that people might have--
if they're eating
the wrong foods,
how are people going to
know if they're off track?
>> How you feel is the
most telling barometer
of what's going on
with your lifestyle.
So you've got to be
feeling great all the time.
If you're not feeling
great all the time,
you don't feel good--
if you're suffering
with indigestion and digestive
problems, that's an alert.
It's your body telling
you, like, hey, look at us.
Wait a second.
Pay attention.
And when you're
paying attention,
you start to go, oh, wait,
my gut's hurting me, right?
Because a lot of times,
people just suffer through it.
They just power
through it anyway.
Go to work, do
everything, but their gut
is really wrenched up.
And it's just that
ability-- and that's
what you guys are
doing, that education,
is just bringing people back and
helping people to go, oh, wait,
something's wrong.
And then if you
meditate on your pain,
it will tell you not
only what is wrong,
it also tells you how to fix it.
>> Mm.
Interesting.
Developing that
body intelligence,
it's such an important skill.
>> It's a very important skill,
and it's one of the things that
has been taken away from us.
Right?
And so it's like our birthright.
Let's claim it back.
>> Yeah.
You've become this
sort of poster boy--
not a great use of the
word, but it is great--
for Nutribullet and blending.
I mean, unless people--
if people haven't seen
your face in this interview
and they live in America,
they're hiding under a rock.
I mean, honestly, you've
just blasted the airwaves.
And I love it because
you're getting people
to have more powerful liquid
nutrition, plants, fruits,
vegetables.
So why is it that
blending is so important?
Why is there such
a craze around it?
And why is it so great?
And what should people be
doing with their blender?
>> One thing that's great
about blending is you keep all
the fiber, and you need fiber.
This is one of the great
untold stories in nutrition,
is the fiber is what
pushes the meat through,
pushes the cheese through,
pushes the eggs through.
There's no fiber in eggs.
There's no fiber in cheese.
There's no fiber in meat.
So you need something to get
everything moving through.
And that's just an important
first step for everybody
because we're usually
having, like, people
start with bacon and eggs.
But where's the fiber?
We need that fiber.
If we juice, we're
getting rid of the fiber.
Blending keeps it.
What about the power of getting
five or six or seven fruits
and vegetables into our diet?
University of College
London did a study,
and they found out
that people who
had five fruits and
vegetables in their diet
were healthier than the
people who had four.
And the people who
had six were healthier
than the people who had five.
The people who had
seven were healthier
than the people who had six.
And it went all the way up.
I think the study went up to
nine fruits and vegetables.
Those people were actually the
healthiest in the population.
We found in our research
with Nutribullet
that when somebody says
they're eating their fruits
and vegetables, they're
usually eating two.
You need five, at least.
And so the Nutribullet was
a way of actually really
for real getting the five,
which is different than saying
you got the five.
Those are different things.
And that's why we get such
incredible testimonials all
the time non-stop.
Because people are
really suddenly going,
whoa, I'm getting the fiber.
I'm getting the phytonutrients.
I'm getting the chlorophyll.
I'm getting the carotenoids.
I'm getting the anthocyanins.
I'm getting the
electrolytes for real.
>> So if people want to
really just go for it,
transform their health, would
you recommend just I'm going
to go liquid five, seven days,
just blend everything up,
lots of fruits, lots
of vegetable-- well,
vegetables and fruits.
Maybe not fruits and
vegetables, right?
You want to keep it more
low sugar, lots of greens.
>> Yeah.
>> What's your general
recommendation for someone who
wants to do that?
>> In the beginning, it's good
to have fruits in there just
to get you doing it.
And then it's just a
step by step process.
Usually the first month,
you're doing more fruits
in that Nutribullet.
As time goes on, you
want more vegetables.
You want more of
the other stuff.
You want more hemp seeds.
You want more things
that are more nutritive
aren't just giving
you a sugar rush.
And that's the great
breakthrough right there,
is that we can't actually
get that into our diet
and do it in a way
that is exciting.
And especially with
kids, it's fascinating.
Kids are excited to get that
Nutribullet out and play
with it.
And another thing, too, is with
Asperger's and autistic kids,
getting them excited
about nutrition,
the Nutribullet is very
helpful in that regard.
I mean, I have a lot of
experience with that.
It's been part of our
process over the years,
is just dealing with those kids
and parents who have complaints
about, like, my kids are not
going to eat any of this stuff.
And it's much easier for a
child with autism or a child
with Asperger's to
blend and drink the food
than to chew through a salad.
>> Mm.
Mm, great.
Let's talk a little bit about
energy, vitality, weight loss.
I mean, the World
Health Organization
has come out recently and said
the three biggest challenges
facing humanity is like obesity
and diabetes-- diabesity,
basically those two-- and
then mental health conditions.
But I think coupled
with that, there's
like a whole energy
fatigue issue
thing going on because of the
way that we live generally.
And people want
to fix that fast.
So I know you're
big into smoothies.
What should people be adding?
Is it all about the
alkalyzing greens?
Is it about superfoods?
What sort of things
do you recommend?
>> OK, well, first, first
things first is energy.
Energy comes from the way
that you are respiring, right?
So it's like the
inspiration, the breathing
is very important
part of energy.
Taking deep breaths,
30 deep breaths a day,
that's probably the number
one thing for energy
is just get away
from everything,
go out and take 30 deep breaths.
If you start digging deeper
into chronic fatigue syndrome,
there's a lot of viral
connections to chronic fatigue
syndrome, especially
cytomegalovirus,
which is herpes 6,
which comes up a lot.
And people are
overrun with viruses,
and so they can't manage
to get the energy up.
And so that's when you got
to start looking at like,
OK, let's get some
garlic in there.
Let's get some things
that are natural
antivirals into our diet, into
the teas, into our herbology.
And in that way, we can start
to guide ourselves out of that.
Cat's Claw, for example,
is an invasive species.
And that tells you
something, by the way.
Invasive species are
very powerful herbs.
And Cat's Claw, Pau
d'Arco combination,
an ancient Amazonian combo, is
very good antiviral, antifungal
combo and delicious as a tea.
Some people are going
to jump into juices,
or some are going to jump
into Nutriblast smoothies.
And some people
are going to jump
into tea because they're more--
that's the way they've
got natural skills
in certain areas.
And so we want to be able to
address each one of those.
And back in the old days,
doing lots of garlic,
very powerful to
get a lot of garlic
moving through your system.
Not recommended before
work, not recommended
when you're going to be
around a lot of other people.
But if you can do
that on a weekend,
if you're away from people, and
just get a good dose of garlic
through your system, this
is 39 natural antibiotics,
one of most powerful
antivirals going.
In general, raw food
has more energy in it
than cooked food, period.
That's just the way it is.
That's why animals in
nature can eat very little
and have so much energy
and are so tough and strong
and physically fit.
As time goes on, you
start to realize that, OK,
if I eat less, I'll
have more energy.
So food doesn't necessarily
give you energy as you age.
It can rob you of energy.
When you're a child,
it's different.
When you're young,
teenagers are different.
When you're 21, it's different.
But when you're 48,
58, 68, then you
start going, whoa,
if I just eat less--
and by the way, if
you eat less, you're
going to be able to live
longer so you can eat more.
>> So for smoothies in that,
if people are putting things
in smoothies, what sort of
things would you recommend
for the energy weight loss
sort of side of things?
>> OK, well, I recommend
people get alkaline first.
Celery, cucumber-- that's it.
Celery, cucumber coconut water--
simple stuff.
Celery, cucumber
coconut water, lemon,
and just keeping it alkaline,
keeping it something where
you go, OK, I think this is--
I've got to adjust to this
as being the new treat.
Because a lot of
times, in the old days,
our treats were really
heinous, like chocolate
icing that who knows what kind
of chemicals were in that?
And then gradually, you
start to treat yourself
with things that are
actually really good for you.
And that's a prerogative
for me, is helping people
to get to that point
where cheating for them
is celery, cucumber, lemon
coconut water, blended.
>> Cheat day.
>> That's cheat.
>> So with people that are going
through life and they've got
these issues, I know you talk a
lot about how toxicity can rob
you from a lot of your life.
How is it that toxins are
having that effect on the body?
>> OK, well, heavy metals
can interfere with our ATP
production and our mitochondria.
And this is something
I hear all the time.
People come up to me.
I can almost see them.
It happens a lot
where I've been like,
that person is coming at me.
I know what they're
coming at me before.
And basically, they
give me this story.
They found me online, or
they saw "Food Matters."
And they got healthy, and
they transformed their lives,
but nothing really worked
until they did the heavy metal
cleansing, until they took
the zeolites and the clays
and the charcoals
and did the sweating
and got the heavy
metals-- essentially,
according to the theory,
get the heavy metals out
of the receptor site so
you can get zinc back
into the receptor sites.
That's the problem right
there, is zinc gets booted out
and you get cadmium into
those receptor sites.
Heavy metal poisoning
is very common.
It's overwhelmingly common.
And the first step is you've
got to get the heavy metals out.
Then we can start
producing energy better,
and then everything
else will work easier.
So that's generally
how we work it.
And by the way, heavy metal
cleansing-- chlorella, right?
So yeah, all those detox
things, zeolites and clays
and charcoals and
chlorella and some
of the super rich
chlorophyll sources,
including wheat grass
and spirulina and blue
green algae and marine
phytoplanktons, and that's
how we start to get
to a point where
we start flipping that so
our body can help itself.
And this is important, too,
in detoxifying ourselves
and getting more energy
and rejuvenating ourselves.
And that is understanding
that your body
will do what it needs to do
when it has the energy to do so.
And it has the
substances to do it.
Your body's always
trying to heal itself.
It's always trying
to fix everything.
Just laying off and just
like, OK, skip dinner tonight,
let my body heal itself.
Let me just lay down and rest
for 12 hours with my eyes
closed, can do wonderful
thing for healing.
>> It's amazing how simple
it is, really, isn't it?
>> Very simple, very basic.
We like to throw the
superfoods and the super herbs
in on top of everything.
But it's really actually
much simpler than that.
Resting more, resting
with eyes closed,
being grounded, being on the
ground, resting at the beach,
laying on the sand,
getting in the ocean,
eating less, fasting, using the
sunshine as food, sun gazing,
getting that last four minutes
of the sun in the evening
or the first four minutes
of the sun in the morning,
barefoot on stone.
It's very important
aspects of health.
>> Powerful.
Love it.
I love it.
So when we talk about foods, we
talk about adding more foods.
I know you're huge on adding.
I love that philosophy.
When you brought that up--
I think I was really
in "Hungry for Change."
You said restriction is out.
It's all about adding
now because it's fun.
People can do it.
You don't take their meat
and potatoes or their toast
or their coffee away.
You just say, add in more
water, add in more super foods.
But there is a fair
bit of discussion
now around people
that are having
a lot of success
eliminating things
like grains out of their diet.
And even I've been speaking
with someone like Novak Djokovic
recently, he's
famous tennis player.
Really good, but he shot
to this huge performance
curve went up because
he gave up gluten.
And he's like, I don't
think this is a coincidence.
This is for real.
And you look at other
athletes as an example
from a performance
perspective of how do you
be a better human?
You perform better, whatever
you do-- mum, dad, athlete.
Tom Brady as well--
pretty much no grains, from
what I understand of his diet.
Kelly Slater, very clean, no
grains, lots of coconut water,
fresh foods.
Is there something in
eliminating grains?
Is there a bigger
story around grains
that we didn't really know?
I mean, I know there's this
whole agriculture thing.
I'd love your opinion on it.
It's been a while.
>> Yeah, grains are
seeds of grasses.
And grasses are a human food,
but they're a small part
of our overall diet in nature.
You can eat and chew up grass.
The most edible part of grass
is either the seed or the corm,
which is the root.
And grass corms, like
bunched grass corms,
are actually pretty good.
They taste like corn--
corm as differentiated
from corn.
And corms can be great food
sources if you're surviving.
But we're not surviving, right?
We're pretty much at this point,
we have an abundance of food.
And it's good to know
that grasses can be foods.
And their products
like their seeds,
which is what grains are, and
their roots can help us out.
And we don't really
need that anymore.
It's kind of like soybeans.
We don't need soybeans.
Like, get rid of it.
It's just too toxic
for most people.
So let's get the
stuff that we know
is going to be the
right thing for us.
And when it comes
to grains, it's
like, what are we
getting from it?
OK, it's like a complex carb.
Maybe there's some
protein in there.
OK, we can get that from quinoa.
We can get that
from sweet potato.
We don't need it,
and when you look
at the highest
performing athletes,
you'll see sweet
potatoes in there.
And that's how we know.
And in fact, that's usually
what I recommend for athletes,
is get off all grains, get off
all complex carbs like bread,
and get on to sweet potato.
And just make sure you have
one or two sweet potatoes
a day as your complex carb.
>> Well, that--
>> Easy, simple.
And sweet potatoes
are subtly anabolic.
So we know that the
pathways there-- we
have never elucidated it
in a peer-reviewed study,
but the pathways there
from the raw materials
of the sweet potato
to testosterone,
the raw materials of the
sweet potato to, for in women,
progesterone.
>> Beautiful.
Let's turn our attention to
the gut for a little bit here.
It's sort of this
part of the health
well that never
got spoken about.
And like, two years
ago, it was like, boom.
The microbiome, its everything.
And it's just exploded
in popularity.
It's where our immunity is.
It's where everything
starts and ends.
What's your take on it?
>> Well, the microbiome
is everything.
We're basically
farming bacteria, is
what we've finally realized.
We have more DNA
in our gut bacteria
than we have in our body,
that this farm that we are
needs these bacteria as
an adjunct to creating
healthy skin, as an
adjunct to creating
healthy digestion, healthy
epithelial cells, all
the way to the coating of
cells, all the way down
through our gut lining.
It's probably the excretion
of these substances
that is most beneficial
to our longevity for sure.
When I did the original
research on longevity
25 years ago at the
Price-Pottenger Nutrition
Foundation in San Diego, one
of the things that came up
repeatedly-- this was
before the internet-- was
in all the great
longevity cases in Europe,
for example, every
single case, there
was a fermented food there.
A cultured food, a
probiotic food-- every case.
And that's something that really
stuck with me from that time
on.
So I stayed with the probiotics,
but ultimately, really,
the best way is to
culture your own food.
Take your vegetable,
shred them up.
Fill them up with a
dilute apple juice.
Put in your L.
plantarum, for example.
Just make it super
easy, just one bacteria.
Just throw that in
there as a powder.
Stir that up, put a
little sea salt in there.
Mash that all up.
Put a little lid on there
that can breathe out,
so as that thing
ferments it pops off,
you don't want stuff
to be able to get in,
but you want the
gases to escape.
And then let it sit for a week.
And then you can get your
live bacteria that way.
And that kind of fermented
food is what creates longevity.
It's also those excretions
create health as well.
And we can get some of those
excretions in other ways,
from our great herbs
and great foods.
And when they're that small
and secreted by bacteria,
they get used.
They get absorbed.
>> I love it.
A little bit of a
nature-based philosophy
question for you here.
I really love musing on this.
How did we accidentally
discover how to ferment foods?
I mean, what a weird
turning point in humanity.
It was like, we didn't
have refrigeration.
We started becoming
hunter-gatherer-gardeners.
Then we had excess crops of,
say, cabbage, for instance.
We threw it in a pile.
What do you think
happened there?
How do we develop
this relationship
with bacteria and fermentation?
I mean, it's a
left field question
but I'd love your thoughts.
>> Well, it probably had
something to do with mixing
our spit and saliva into our
food early on, especially
for children, and then finding
out that those cultures could
survive on longer and could
be used for more and more
vegetables or more things.
Because you see that more in
indigenous and original peoples
that they still use their
own saliva to ferment things.
And that's probably
how it started.
Also, if you're just playing
around with substances
in nature-- for example, grapes
and then berries and then
mugwort--
and I'm just thinking of
some things in my local flora
and fauna and some of the
different leaves that you eat.
You find out that there's
different types of bacteria
on each one of them, right?
So grapes are going to
be broken down by yeast.
And your berries are
going to be broken down
by bacteria and yeast.
And then so that
you'll see, you'll
start to notice that there's
different natural bacteria that
are already there on that grape
that if you leave it alone,
they're going to digest that
food right there on the spot.
They'll eat it themselves.
And so you start
to go, oh, OK, this
is probably how
wines got started.
Because if you just mash up all
the grapes and let them sit,
the yeast that's already there
on the grape surface, which is
like the surface of our skin--
it has its own probiotics
on it, just as the grape
has its own probiotics on it--
it starts to-- you start to
see, oh, OK, I could just
let this thing eat itself.
And then let me just take
the byproduct of that.
Now I'm sure that ancient
people figured out that there's
two great benefits of that.
One is you get to
keep the food longer.
So in grape season, you only
get a certain amount of seeds,
and then it's gone.
So if you want grapes
longer than the season,
that's one way to do it.
But the other thing is
that you will get effects
from it that you can't get
from eating the grapes.
And I'm not just talking
about the alcohol effects.
I'm talking about there's,
like, resveratrol.
Resveratrol in grapes is
pretty much unavailable
when you eat it.
When you eat grapes,
it's not going to happen.
But when you
dissolve it and when
it's dissolved in
the alcohol that's
created by the fermentation
of that grapes,
that resveratrol can be
driven in by the alcohol
and made bio available.
And this is the theory as to
why Mediterranean peoples live
longer, is because
they're getting
these fermented products of
the grapes, the phenols, one
of the most famous
being resveratrol,
into their body in
a way that's usable.
And it makes it in.
So I think that's
part of it, too.
>> I'm glad I asked
that question.
>> Great one.
>> It wasn't on the sheet.
It wasn't on the sheet.
So let's talk about
the ideal diet.
I mean, this is
a tough question.
I know, but I want to
hear your sort of updated
or the same version of, like,
if you had to sort of prescribe
general dietary recommendations
for the human populace--
now this is a tough one.
>> Yeah, no, it's easy for me.
I'm doing that all the time.
Yeah.
>> But I know we have
biochemically individuality.
We live in different parts of
the world, all sort of things.
But what is your
general recommendation
for the human species and how
they should nourish themselves?
>> You should eat
a plant-based diet.
That doesn't mean only plants.
You should eat whatever
animal foods that are
going to keep you in balance.
And we do the
opposite, of course.
We eat all animal
foods and then try
to use plant foods
to save ourselves.
And everything's
always the opposite
than what we were taught.
So using plant-based
foods-- if you
find that you can be
a vegetarian, great.
If you find that you can
be a vegan, wonderful.
You find that you
can't, OK, great.
But you still need
plants for the fibers.
You still need plants
for the phytochemicals.
You still need plants for
the chlorophyll, right?
So it's just that basic
balance of finding out, OK,
if I'm going to
have a meal, let's
try to simplify that meal.
Let's say I was going to have--
I don't eat fish,
but let's say it's
like fish and rice and salad.
Let's just make
it fish and salad.
Get the rice out of there
because that complex carb
is going to mix in a way
that's going to disturb
the digestion of the protein.
That's the whole food
combining concept.
Very important key concept
if you want more energy,
that's for sure.
If you just food
combine correctly,
if you want just more
rice and salad, OK, great.
Have rice and salad, but keep
that fish out of there, right?
So it's going to be
one or the other.
And instead of having, for
example, three different types
of complex carbs, just have one.
Just have more of it.
You want two sweet potatoes?
Great, have two sweet
potatoes and a salad.
And keep it simple like that.
When you have salad, salad
is the great neutralizer.
It's the great way of helping
that food just go through you
like it's an antidote.
If you just ate sweet
potato, it's kind of like,
it's a little too--
it's a little too carb-based.
And you need that fiber to
help move it all through.
If you just had fish, OK,
you're just too much protein
sitting there.
You need that carb to help
move, or you need that fiber
to help move that all through.
What else can be said as
general dietary recommendations?
Once you get your food sorted
out, you go to quality, right?
So instead of being on the GMO
and you go to conventional, you
go to organic, and
you go to biodynamic,
and you go to homegrown,
you go to wild food.
So there's always that
step-by-step progression there.
When it comes to the next
thing beyond that is then
you come to the superfoods.
You realize, OK, I don't want
to just eat like whatever.
I want to have like the
best thing of all time.
And so you start
looking at superfoods
that makes sense to you that
might even be local to you--
aloe vera, goji berries, cacao.
I'm a vanilla grower, so I
can put that herb in there.
We're going to get
to herbs in a second.
I like to throw in
the super greens,
the marine phytoplankton, the
chlorella, the spirulinas,
the blue green algaes,
hemp seed, chia seed.
So we start adding those things.
And once we've established
that basic diet,
that plant-based diet,
and once we've established
the quality of that
diet and we understand
that OK, if I'm going to have
a meal, let's keep it simple.
Is it just fish and rice?
No, it's fish and salad or
rice and salad, but not both.
And then we go to
the next level.
We'll be on super foods.
And that is super herbs.
Then we start getting into
the herbal tea world, which
is, OK, I could take in the most
powerful herbs in the world.
Why would I take in something
that's herb number 333?
I don't care what that is.
I want the most powerful
herb that's around me.
And then when I'm
done with that one,
I want the second most powerful.
Because I want to start building
prevention for the future
so that I'm preventing
disease for the future,
and I'm preventing
aging for the future
and preventing loss of
energy for the future.
And we call that
the treasures, where
you're nourishing treasures.
And that's ultimately where
you go as your strategy.
Eventually you come
to a point of let
me just basically get on the
superfoods and the super herbs.
And I'll have some
food maybe once a day
or maybe once every few
days, because I'm out
socially or whatever.
But ultimately, that's
where we're going,
is we're getting
to the super herbs
as part of a
prevention strategy.
And all that's just food.
That doesn't include
water, right?
So in the morning, we have
water and charcoal and sea salt
and things that detoxify
us and hydrate us.
And maybe even later, have
water, sea salt, or water,
sea salt, and charcoal in
order to hydrate and detoxify.
And that way, we
can keep ourselves
going strong and healthy
without doing too much damage
to our body as we age.
>> Nice.
Beautiful answer.
I love it.
It'll relate to a lot of people.
It makes it easy for people to
approach nutrition, which is
always your work, your mission.
And you're a food guy
and I'm a food guy.
I love food, you love food.
But I want to know
how much you're
on the page of acknowledging
how important the mind is.
There's a lot more research
coming out about this.
I'm sure we share a
lot of great friends,
like Bruce Lipton or people
in this mind body space.
But when it comes to
disease, the more research
I'm finding out is
like, whoa, the mind
plays such a huge part in it.
Tell me your
thoughts about if you
think the mind is
powerful and why
and what in particular about it.
Is it belief systems and values?
Or is it meditation or stress?
And what work are you doing
in that space in particular?
>> Well, if you're paying
attention to what I'm doing
with my Facebook page, you're
finding out that that's become
the dominant thing that we do,
is helping people to change
their mind.
I mean, if there's one
disease that's incurable,
it's a closed mind.
And by the way, when
people have a closed mind,
they're pretty much if they
get a doomsday diagnosis,
they're going to go down.
They're not going to make it.
I've seen that over
and over again.
I've talked to many
doctors around the world
and asked them that
specific question.
And that is if somebody is
not open to transforming
their thoughts about
their condition,
if they won't change their
mind and they believe that this
is a battle they have to fight
and they're basically fighting
an uphill battle or whatever the
setup is inside their own mind,
they're usually going
to lose that fight.
But if they believe
that they can win,
if they believe they
can change their mind,
they can change their habits,
they can change their life,
they can change their immediate
social environment or even
their home environment,
then they usually make it.
And I've also asked
that question.
Will somebody make
it if they believe
they can, if they change the
people around them to support
them in their own
healing, if they
get a pet so that they have
that love to help support them?
Will they make it?
And the answer is yes.
They are two or three
times, even four times,
more likely to
make it, depending
on what the disease is
and what the diagnosis is.
I want to say this, too.
And that is in every case
of a serious condition,
there always, in my experience,
has been a mental component.
I can't think of one exception.
A friend of mine confronted
me with that many years ago.
And so I've been watching it.
And every time, there
is a mental component
to the condition that the
person is dealing with.
And the best way to deal with
that, as I've found, is right
there, you look at
your phone, and boom,
there's the Facebook page.
And there's the
positive affirmation
that caused you to go, oh,
oops, I was in doomsday.
And it's actually
the best day ever.
I forgot.
Let me get back on
to the best day ever.
And that was the
original inception
of why do the Facebook
page the way I do it,
was to just bring that
person an uplifting message
right at that
moment so that they
could transform their lives
and get back on track.
>> I love it.
Fear, you touched on it
there-- massive issue.
I think people are
fearful because we've
been taught to be fearful.
And we're fearful of death,
we're fearful of a disease.
We're fearful of what
other people think of us.
>> Fear of success.
>> Fear of success, fear
of failure, everything.
Do you think that's
a common thread?
When you said that
people generally
have some sort of emotional
component, do you think there's
a fear component, or
is there an anxiety?
Or is there depression?
What do you think is
a common trend there?
Or do you think
fear is a big issue
for a lot of people, and
the wealth, for that matter?
>> For sure.
I mean, anxiety is
the number one cause
of mental neuroses in our
culture and Western culture.
And it's affecting, if we look
at the numbers, it's 20% to 25%
of the population is in
fear and anxiety quite a bit
and is actually even
reaching for medication
for fear and anxiety.
And I think this is one
of the reasons why we've
had a breakthrough in
America with medical cannabis
because people
are realizing, I'd
rather take the cannabis than
these other drugs, whatever
those drugs are.
And that's a breakthrough,
but still, the cannabis
isn't going to get
you out of the fear.
It may help you to
deal with the anxiety,
but what's going to get you
out of the fear and the anxiety
is doing the thing.
And then you will have the
power to strike out boldly
with courage anyway and
do it anyway, right?
The internet, in the old days,
it was your own internal fears
about going on TV or what
people would say about you.
Now it's social media trolling.
People hate you on social media,
so they're going to troll you.
And so people come up
with those fears, like,
no, I can't succeed.
What if I get
trolled or whatever?
And it's that is the same thing
we're dealing with before.
It's just do the thing,
strike out with courage,
and you shall have the power.
>> Beautiful, I love it.
You could talk on
anything, David, honestly.
I love that we're taking this
part of the conversation here.
Meditation and
stress reduction--
big talk about it.
We've got a few
films on it on FM TV.
It's a hot topic right now,
and people get a lot of relief
from it.
You talked in a
separate interview
a little bit about how resting
can be so important, laying
on the sand.
Is this something that
you recommend people do,
like stress reduction,
meditation, breathwork.
Why is it so important for
healing and maintaining health?
>> Well, the stress response
we know is an inflammatory
response.
And it's an aging response,
and it's one of those things
that we have to really look
at our overall biology.
We have to look at our overall
capabilities and realize, OK,
can I really handle
this kind of workload?
Can I really handle
this kind of stress
and be healthy at the same time?
And for some people who are
type A personalities and can
just power through
it, they can do it.
And some people,
they can't do it.
So we really need to be
honest with ourselves
and look at our workload and go,
OK, I need to get rid of this.
I need to get rid of that.
I need to get rid of this.
I need to get rid
of that in order
so that I can have the time to
meditate and all that, in order
that I can have
the time to garden,
and also to live a
stress free lifestyle.
And with other
people, like for me,
where I get my stress
reduction is just
being at home, being in the
garden, being in that orchard,
being with my trees, that
that's what it's about for me.
And I'm not a sit in
a yoga room meditator.
I'm a meditator who is out
there, trimming my cacao trees.
I'm out there cleaning
up the orchard.
That's the meditation for
me, and usually in silence
by myself.
And that's the time
of no mind to me.
Right?
I'm not out there,
like, dissecting
the problems of the day.
I'm out there just in
a state of no mind.
So I get those same
benefits of meditation.
But I'm doing also
what I love to do.
It's almost a subconscious
thing at this point.
Like, weeding for me is
like a subconscious thing.
I can weed the
whole garden and not
even realize what
I've been doing
because I've been in a state
of no mind the whole time.
You really have to know
that about yourself.
It's just that same
thing as the Greeks said.
Know thyself.
Work on yourself and figure
out, OK, what needs to go?
And what's good?
What's serving me?
What's not?
>> Mm-hmm.
I love it.
Do you think-- this is a little
bit of a personal question
here-- that
visualization has been
a big part of your mission
getting to the world?
I mean, you've been at
this now for 20, 25 years,
and epic monumental effort.
And now you're shifting the
lives of billions of people
monthly, is seeing
your messaging.
I mean, it's
staggering and amazing.
And I'm so, so proud and humbled
to be in your presence again.
I love it.
Did you visualize this, David?
Was this something that
you said, you know what?
I really, really, really
want to wake people
up, crack them open.
Or was it something you
just applied yourself
and it just happened?
I'd love to know.
>> OK, well, it's
definitely two things.
The most important
is goal setting.
Years ago, 25 years
ago, I wrote the goal,
"I capture the
attention of all media."
And I had no idea
what that meant.
That was before the internet.
I thought I was going
to go on TV shows,
or it was going to be
something like that.
I didn't know what--
I'd have my own TV show.
I had no idea-- my own channel.
So I don't know.
I couldn't figure
it out back then,
but I thought nature
will figure it out.
God will figure it out.
Source energy figures it out,
whatever your interpretation
is.
And it will happen because
goal setting is something
I believe in, and I know that
if I set 100 goals, usually
I hit around 33% every year.
It's like a rule.
It's like if I just set 100
and I go back a year later,
it's usually around 30 to 35
of them are hit every year.
And so you set a
goal, you get a goal.
That's number one.
Number two is I
did visualize it.
So when I set goals, I also
visualized those goals.
And capturing the
attention of all media
meant that I needed to
become a very good presenter
of information.
I needed to understand the
information inside and out
and needed to apply myself.
I needed to go out and
do thousands of events
so I would be prepared for
that time when we finally broke
through and got to all media.
And that time is now.
We got there, and
it took 25 years.
God's delays aren't God's
denials, too, by the way.
And sometimes you get a goal,
sometimes you set a goal,
and it doesn't happen.
OK, it's not
happening this year.
Maybe it'll happen next year.
Maybe it'll happen
five years from now.
But it will eventually
happen, and that's
what I've discovered in my life.
I've been setting goals
now for over 30 years.
>> Love it.
Love it.
Great practice.
What words of wisdom
would you have
for someone who's feeling a
little bit stuck in their life?
Maybe they're doing
the right food,
they think they've
got more work to do,
but they want to achieve more
fulfillment and more passion
and have a better quality
life, particularly
in that fulfillment and
passion and growth area.
What sort of advice would you
have for people around that?
>> If you set a goal and you
get a goal, you're fulfilled,
especially a big goal.
20 something years
ago-- it might even
have been 25 years ago.
Around that same time, I
wrote an entire script,
an entire infomercial about
selling a blender on TV.
I wrote an entire book on it.
And it happened.
So that led to an amazing
level of fulfillment.
Can't be taken away from me.
I don't need to do it again.
I'm happy with what happened.
It just proved to
me that the dreams
of a child, my dreams from when
I was five years old of getting
on TV and doing the
infomercial thing,
that I eventually wrote
out as all my goals
when I was 22 or 23
years old, and then
achieved all that
led to a fulfillment.
And it's a fulfillment that
can't be taken away from you.
There's no emotion
that goes around.
I don't know what-- the
best word is fulfillment.
It's like you feel
something-- is
you feel like you know something
in this world that works.
And that is if anything is worth
having, it's worth working for.
And so you go out and you
work hard for that goal.
And you work hard, you
work hard, you work hard,
and then you achieve it.
You achieve fulfillment.
There's no quick, easy
way to get to fulfillment.
Fulfillment comes from deep
work, deep work raising
children, for example, deep
work with grandchildren,
deep work in your career.
That's where
fulfillment comes from.
There's one more to it
I do want to mention.
Farming and gardening
and horticulture--
that creates fulfillment,
especially over time.
So if you're set on a piece
of land for a long time,
and you've been growing
things on that land,
and you've got trees
now that you planted,
and now they're 10 meters
tall or 20 meters tall,
and you remember when
they were a seed,
there's something there that
also brings fulfillment.
This thing of planting trees
is what led to the Fruit Tree
Planting Foundation.
There's some level
of fulfillment
that comes from having
put a million trees
in the ground since 2002.
We put a million
trees in the ground.
We've terraformed the
entire big island of Hawaii.
The entire big island of
Hawaii will permanently
have durians, permanently
have jackfruits,
permanently have meringues,
permanently have cacao.
There's no world cataclysm
that could take it away.
And it was because we did it.
We lived and we did it.
And it was the
original raw food crew
from San Diego that moved
over to Hawaii that did that.
That is an incredible
level of fulfillment.
We have changed the big
island of Hawaii forever.
And we've turned many
areas of the big island
that would have been beautiful
for us into food forests now.
>> I love that.
I love it.
So final question, if the
world was your classroom
and you're about to
walk out on stage,
and you had a couple of
minutes to teach them anything,
anything from the treasure
trove of your life learnings,
what would you teach them?
>> I would teach them how
to have the best day ever,
that today is all we got.
And even if it's
the worst ever, you
can turn it around,
if you keep meditating
on how to turn it around.
If you keep asking,
how can I take this day
and turn it into the best
day ever, it can happen.
It's happened to me.
I've had crazy days where
the worst thing ever
happened in the morning,
and I just kept going.
It's going to turn around.
How I was going to turn
it around, I didn't know,
but I'm just going
to keep asking,
how can I turn it around?
What do I need to do?
How do I need to act?
How do I need to move my face?
How do I need to smile
in order for this thing
to be the best day ever?
And then boom, by
nightfall, it suddenly
was the best day of all time,
just that amazing ability
to transform our day.
And that's all we got.
All we got is today.
We don't have any more time.
Tomorrow's never
going to arrive.
Yesterday's history.
Today's the day.
So if we're going to
have the best ever,
it's going to be today.
>> I love it.
You're an absolute
champion, David Wolfe.
Good one, my man.
>> Thank you, James.
>> Woo.
[MUSIC PLAYING]